Thanks for being here.
My name's Chris.
I have the privilege of leading our campus in the Fox Valley area, and it really is a privilege.
And it's fun to come to Green Bay, though.
It really is.
It's fun to come and hang out with you all.
If we haven't had a chance to meet each other, hello, by the way, and good to see you.
Maybe for the first time, maybe we've had a chance, been able to be here a number of different times over the last
18, 19 months and meet some of you and had an opportunity to share God's word.
But it is a privilege tonight as we're kind of right here in the middle of our Lenten season.
And I want to welcome those of you that are tuning in online and of course our Fox Valley family.
They're not tuning in with us, but they are gathering together as a church family and they bring their love as well from the Fox Valley.
We're just going to open up God's word for a few moments here, and I know we have some time later on.
We're going to gather in fellowship around soup.
But let's just dive in.
Maybe you're familiar with Greek mythology, any Greek mythology fans, probably not, right?
Or maybe you saw the Brad Pitt movie, Troy.
Probably if you saw that movie, you remember this guy by the name of Achilles, who was like the
the most dominant warrior for the Greeks.
He was just plain beast mode.
He was unbeatable, really.
You could hit him anywhere on his body, and he could literally take it.
He could withstand it.
But there was one place on Achilles' body that he had a weakness.
As legend has it, when he was a small boy, his mom was dipping him into this
this water that gave him kind of this supernatural ability.
But when she did that, she was kind of holding him by his heel.
You can kind of get a picture of it.
So his heel didn't make it all the way into the water.
Now, as Achilles grows older, he, like I said, he's just like this beast mode of a warrior.
But there's one small piece on his body that literally is his weakness.
And if you strike him there, it would ultimately be to
to his demise, and that's exactly what happened, in fact.
In fact, in the Trojan War, there was a warrior by the name of Paris, who sort of launches this single arrow into the air, and it strikes Achilles on his heel, and it just completely takes him down, and it destroys him.
Now, I'm sure that many of you likely are aware of the fact that
that this term Achilles is also used to refer to that tendon that runs along the backside of our heel, right?
And an Achilles injury can be super, super painful and incredibly difficult to rehab from.
Like some of you might remember, in 2013, Kobe Bryant ruptured his
Achilles tendon, it took him like eight months to sort of rehab it.
And then again in 2019, Kevin Durant ruptured his in game five against the Toronto Raptors.
And many would say, listen, many would say of any professional athlete at that level, like if they rupture their Achilles tendon, the odds, they're not very good that they're going to come back and perform at the same level that they did prior to the injury.
So whether it comes to Greek mythology or an actual Achilles injury, the term Achilles' heel is often used to sort of, it's used as a metaphor to describe maybe this vulnerability or a weakness that we might have of some kind in our character.
And just like the Greek mythology or the injury, who would have thought something so small could bring somebody down?
So when it comes to our character, the season of Lent that we're in right now, it sort of propels us to do an inventory of our character, doesn't it?
It propels us to do some inventory of our behaviors and our actions and our attitudes.
Now, I bet if we went around the room, we probably would, and if we did some inventory stuff, we probably would find a bunch of really strong character traits, right?
I know we have some here tonight, right?
Some real strong character traits.
But here's the thing.
We often fail to focus on, and what I love about the season of Lent,
Like, do we ever say, like, where can I be taken down?
Like, where can I be literally taken out?
Like, what's the small sort of sort of understated thing that I'm not paying attention to?
Like, maybe it's the thing that if I don't get a handle on it, it could literally bring my marriage down.
Like it could bring my relationships down.
It maybe could ruin my career or my reputation.
It could actually be the thing that actually distances us from God.
Like what is that thing?
And the thing is it happens all the time, doesn't it?
Have you ever been shocked to hear about people who maybe made a bad decision or maybe they got caught or
or they kind of had this double life going on and something was exposed and it sort of eventually came to the surface and you're kind of like, what's up with that?
Like what happened there?
And if you really knew the full story, you'd recognize that most often it was there Achilles heel.
You know what I mean?
Like there was this part of their character that was sort of going unchecked for far too long.
And eventually it kind of caught up with them.
Now here's the deal.
It's easy to sit in judgment in those moments of other people when that happens, but can we be honest?
We're all vulnerable, right?
And every single one of us has an Achilles heel, so to speak, that we need to keep an eye on and keep in check.
And that's what I love about the Lenten season.
It pushes us toward that.
And at the time, maybe we think, well, it's small, it doesn't seem like it's a big deal, but it could ultimately take us down.
And as you know that God's word, it not only tells us what this Achilles heel is, but it warns us over and over and over again to sort of keep an eye on it.
And it manifests itself in all kinds of different ways in our lives, but I'd like to suggest tonight that the root of it
is all the same.
Now before I tell you what it is, let me just give you a few kind of descriptions of what this Achilles heel does in our lives.
Just so you can see if you know what we're talking about tonight.
It's the thing that keeps us from celebrating the success of other people.
It's the thing that keeps us from admitting that we struggle and that we're never going to let people see the real us.
It's the thing that sort of keeps us from asking questions because we think we already know the answer, right?
It keeps us from admitting that we're wrong even when we know we're wrong.
It maybe causes you to write somebody off and hold a grudge because they offended you and maybe they didn't even know that they offended you.
It's the thing that causes you to maybe shade the truth about your past or to talk maybe too much about yourself or to exaggerate your accomplishments.
Do you know what I'm talking about tonight?
It's pride.
Pride is our Achilles heel.
Now, the thing about pride is that it manifests itself in all different kinds of ways in our life.
But like I said, the root of it is all the same.
And it can take us out.
Let me just help you.
Let me just describe it.
Just a couple of things that the Bible says about pride.
It says in Proverbs 16, 18, it says, pride goes before destruction and hotiness.
before a fall.
So before anything is destroyed, before something falls or crumbles most often, you'll find pride.
But actually, God has something even much more stronger to say about pride in chapter eight of Proverbs, verse 13.
It says, I hate pride and arrogance.
You see, I want you to understand something tonight.
God doesn't hate anyone, but he hates the pride
that's in everyone.
And it's in all of us, right?
Can we be honest?
It's sneaky, isn't it?
It's sinister.
But sometimes we don't recognize it as pride, do we?
But God hates it.
I don't know, maybe you're here tonight, and you hear that, and you read that verse, or maybe you heard someone say that before it, and may even surprise you a little bit.
Like out of all the things that God could hate, like pride, really?
Like pride?
Like I could understand like God hating things like lying and murder and abuse and racism, right?
Like those are all really bad things.
Like we can all agree that God should hate those, but pride, really?
What's so bad about pride?
Like what's wrong with pride?
But God says he hates pride in our lives.
Why is that?
Oh man, if you look at any marriage that doesn't make it, and you trace it back to the root of it, and you're gonna see probably all kinds of different issues going on, but at the root of those issues, you're probably gonna find pride, right?
Like if you look at friendships that sort of break up in some destructive ways, if you trace it all the way back far enough, most of the time you're gonna find pride there.
Like pride actually holds us back from having an accurate understanding of who we are.
Whether you think too highly of yourself or too lowly of yourself.
It can actually block us from living out God's purposes and his plans for our life.
Pride will keep us from asking for help when we really need help.
And some of us have been there and it hasn't ended well, has it?
You might be here tonight and you got a lot of different questions going on about pride and one of those questions.
I even alluded to it earlier.
You might be sitting there like, what's wrong with pride?
Maybe even thought pride was a good thing.
Because you've maybe equated pride with self-confidence.
Why shouldn't I believe in myself?
If I don't believe in myself, who else will?
And this is where I think a definition of pride tonight will help us.
Pride is simply having an excessively high opinion or preoccupation with your own importance, achievements, status, or position.
Now, this can also go the other way, this preoccupation with self.
It actually can look a little bit like
Like humility, you know what I mean?
Like it can actually be one of those things where we're not really honest about our gifts and our talents and we sort of do this, you know, self-image management game and we're not really honest with who we are.
Like those are our insecurities, aren't they?
And I'd like to suggest tonight that insecurities are still rooted in a preoccupation with self.
Now here's a question I have for you tonight.
Do any of you know this person I'm describing tonight?
Don't point to him right now, please.
Don't do that.
But do any of you work for this person or maybe you're related by marriage to this person?
I don't know.
Sure, we all know this person and this might be a tough topic for some of us, but here's the more critical question tonight.
Are you this person?
And unless you're really self-aware and like brutally honest, chances are not too many of us are going to raise our hand right now.
But here's the thing about pride, at least what I've learned.
We can easily spot it in other people, but we rarely often see it in ourselves.
The reason why is that pride is blinding, I think.
In fact, there's this little verse of the Old Testament, the book of Obadiah.
It says, you have been deceived by your own pride.
Pride can be deceptive.
In other words, what keeps you and me from seeing the pride in our lives is actually the pride in our lives.
And if you say, man, I don't think I have a problem with pride, it's likely that it's pride that's causing you
to say that.
C.S.
Lewis in his book, Mirror Christianity, he says this, there is one vice of which no man in the world is free, a vice which everyone in the world loaves when they see it in someone else, and of which hardly any people ever imagine that they are guilty of themselves, that is pride.
So there's two things that we sort of hold intention here.
That we're created intentionally by God and he has a plan and a purpose for our life and our life has infinite value, right?
Like there's nobody like you.
And yet, at the exact same time, we live in a really, really big world and we are not the center of that world.
There's a lot of people on planet Earth.
This life that we live is not just a movie with everyone else, it's like the supporting past and characters in our lives.
We're holding these two tensions in our life.
We recognize how small we are and how valuable we are at the exact same time.
Now I get it, Ben, you might be here tonight or you're tuning in online
You might think, man, I'm really not sure that this message on pride is like at the top of my list of the problems that I face in my life right now.
You might be like, man, Chris, I'm struggling with my own self-worth and my own insecurity, my self-doubt and my fears.
So why are we talking about pride?
I guess I'd like to suggest tonight that pride, most of the time, isn't just about you thinking more highly of yourself than you should.
Pride is just thinking too much about you.
And both of those paths lead to the exact same thing.
Like what God desires for us to do is for us to stop thinking so much about what other people think of us or what they imagine they think of us.
And he actually wants you to begin to hear what it is that he has to say to you about you.
so that you can add value and make a difference to the world around you.
So here's the question tonight.
What do we do with this?
What do we do to heal our Achilles heel?
How do we rehab this back to health?
If we found ourself tonight, checking our heart and recognizing, man, I got some work to do in this area.
I'd like to suggest tonight that the antidote to pride is humility.
But I think we need to understand what humility is.
Humility isn't sort of this self-deprecation thing like, oh man, I'm such a loser, right?
No, no, that's not humility.
Nor is it false humility, the things that we try to manage our self-image with, like half-truths and manipulation, that false humility.
And if we had time tonight to look at the life of King Saul,
Man, you'd know what I'm talking about.
I feel free to read it this week.
First Samuel, maybe chapters eight to 15, man.
You're gonna see some pride in the form of false humility on display in his life and ultimately to his demise.
But what I want you to realize tonight is this.
Humility is understanding very clearly who God says you are and what he's made you to be.
James 4 10 says this, humble yourselves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.
So we humble ourselves before God, then he'll lift us up.
But sometimes when we fall into the trap of wanting to lift ourselves up, man, that's what we can be taken down.
In fact, maybe you've heard the phrase before.
The CS Lewis said it as well.
He said, humility is not thinking less of yourself, but what?
But thinking of yourself less.
And Jesus, he was the perfect example and demonstration of this.
Because Jesus, man, he was God in the flesh.
Like if anybody had bragging rights, it would be Jesus, right?
Like he did some crazy, amazing things.
Like he did miracles, he literally changed people's lives.
Like you don't see any insecurity in Jesus, but you also don't see
and the arrogance in Jesus.
He seemed to manage that tension really well.
And he did it because he knew who he was.
He's like, God the Father has sent me, and I know why I'm here.
He actually leveraged his gifts and his strengths for the good of other people.
And you can read it all throughout the gospels, like he was adding value to people's lives, both in the immediate and in the long term.
So when Jesus would do these miracles, like what you would see in these moments is like a perfect example of humility.
I check it out, one time Jesus, he healed a blind man.
Maybe you know the story, right?
By spitting in the dirt and making some mud and smearing it on the guy's eyes, right?
It's a really cool example of humility because I'm thinking, man, he didn't have to do that, right?
Like he could have just like bam healed the guy, right?
No, Jesus, like, hocked a lugee in the dirt, and he made some mud.
That's an epic move.
So I look at me.
But afterwards, though, he's not like self-deprecating.
He's not like, well, anyone could have done that.
It's just beginner's luck.
No, no.
Jesus, he didn't do that.
He knew exactly who he was and what he had done.
And that's what he's calling you and me to do.
That's why we need to take advantage of this Lenten season.
And we need to spend some extended time in God's Word and with God in practicing our spirituality and our Christian faith so we can hear very clearly what God says about us and who we are.
Because man, if we've got our ears tuned to all the noise all around the world, now we're going to lose our identity faster than anything.
So our ultimate example of humility, the way that we rehab our Achilles heel called pride back to wholeness is found in Jesus himself.
So I wanna finish our time here by reading this incredible example of Jesus's humility that we are to model in our own lives.
It's from the book of Philippians chapter two,
And I'm gonna read one through 11 to end our time together.
Listen to this beautiful example of our savior.
Therefore, if you have any encouragement from being united with Christ, if any comfort from his love, if any common sharing in the spirit, if any tenderness and compassion, then make my joy complete by being like-minded, having the same love being one in spirit and of one mind.
Do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit, rather, in humility, value others above yourselves, not looking to your own interests, but each of you to the interests of the others.
In your relationships with one another, have the same mindset as Christ Jesus, who, being in the very nature of God, did not consider equality with God something to be used to his own advantage.
Rather, he made himself nothing
by taking the very nature of a servant being made in human likeness.
And being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to death, even death on a cross.
Therefore, God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name, that on the name of Jesus, every knee should bow in heaven and on earth and under the earth, and every tongue acknowledged that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God, the Father.
Guys, imagine if we could live that out how different our world might be right now.
We're not looking just to our own interests, but also to the interest of others.
Man, that's the reason we're still talking about this guy 2000 years later, like he was God in the flesh and he laid it down.
He had come to serve, not to be served, and that's our antidote
to our Achilles heel.
It's to take the focus off of ourselves, whether we think too highly of ourselves or chances are most likely we're thinking too less of ourselves.
So we take our eyes off of ourselves and onto God.
We say, God, who have you created me to be?
Who have you called me to be?
Who have you said that I am?
And it's with that understanding, we can seek to make a difference in the lives of other people around us.
Come on, we're difference makers, right?
And the only way that we can make a difference is when we have a right-sized understanding of our identity, our value, our worth.
And the only way we find that is through our Heavenly Father, right?
Can I pray for us?
Heavenly Father, I know that tonight a message like this can feel a little heavy, maybe a little tough to hear.
But God, in the honesty of this moment, we recognize that we all have it in one way, shape, or form.
Our sinful nature many times gets the best of us, and that's God why we enter into this special season where we recognize our need for our Savior.
So God, I pray for every single one of my friends in this place as they take this short message, God, I pray that we would continue to do some rehab in our life.
Whatever that might look like, God, God put the right people in our path to continue this conversation going, God in our quiet time and the still moments, God, speak to us clearly, God, the areas of our life that have gone unchecked before it takes us out, O God.
God, thank you, above all, for Jesus, who gave us an incredible example of humility, who walked in who he was, God.
And God, thank you that we,
have the opportunity to the best of our ability follow your son Jesus as a disciple.
So, God, we choose to put the work in, to rehab in our lives, to find wholeness and healing.
And I pray for that, God, the rest of this week, God, God bless these your people.
In Jesus name, I pray.
Amen.
We're gonna take some time and enjoy some fellowship out in the
the lobby, just one quick announcement before you are dismissed.
If you do have kids here, elementary age kids or preschool or babies here, why don't you go and pick up your kids before you make your way to the soup?
And you can leave the students right where they're at, they're all good.
Thanks for letting me hang out with you guys tonight.
God bless you guys, you're dismissed.
Thanks for being here.